SSMRadNet : A Sample-wise State-Space Framework for Efficient and
Ultra-Light Radar Segmentation and Object Detection
Anuvab Sen, Mir Sayeed Mohammad, Saibal Mukhopadhyay
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
asen74@gatech.edu, mirsayeedmohammadégatech.edu, saibal.mukhopadhyay@ece.gatech.edu
WY
N
S Abstract computation and latency bottlenecks.
oO To address the point cloud challenges, recent works
oO We introduce SSMRadNet, the first multi-scale State Space have demonstrated convolution, attention, and recurrent
Qa Model (SSM) based detector for Frequency Modulated network based approaches to learn features directly from
Continuous Wave (FMCW) radar that sequentially ADC cube (Table 1) [1, 5, 11, 13, 28, 30, 32, 35]. As
oa processes raw ADC samples through two SSMs. One SSM an example, Rebut et al. pioneered FFT-RadNet[17] that
— learns a chirp-wise feature by sequentially processing avoids computing the full 3D range-azimuth-Doppler tensor
Qu samples from all receiver channels within one chirp, by using a CNN that learns to recover object angles
n and a second SSM learns a representation of a frame from the 2D range-Doppler input, thus eliminating one
na by sequentially processing chirp-wise features. The FFT stage and reducing computation. As an alternative,
6 latent representations of a radar frame are decoded to ADCNet [33] learns representations directly from the
oO perform segmentation and detection tasks. Comprehensive ADC cube using CNN based approaches further reducing
—_— evaluations on the RADIal dataset show SSMRadNet has computation. However, parameter, computation, and
N 10-33x fewer parameters and 60-88x less computation memory complexity of 3D CNN increases non-linearly
> (GFLOPs) while being 3.7x faster than state-of-the-art with dimension of the ADC cube. T-FFT-RadNet family
nN transformer and convolution-based radar detectors at [5, 11] proposed transformer based methods that interpret
\o competitive performance for segmentation tasks. samples within the ADC cube as tokens and replace CNNs
SB with attention. The design shows improved performance
oO (accuracy), but as the computational cost of self-attention
— 1. Introduction scales quadratically, processing long radar sample-by-chirp
= sequences is computationally expensive (Table 1).
vay Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) radars ChirpNet pioneered a sequential method where digitized
N improve the perception of autonomous systems under ADC samples from all receivers for a chirp are encoded
y adverse conditions [16, 34]. A FMCW radar frame into a feature vector, and features across chirps are learned
= is represented by a C x S x Np, tensor of digitized using a recurrent network [24]. The design shows lower
x samples (analog-to-digital-converters (ADC) cube), where computation, parameters, and latency than prior methods,
8 C, Np,, and S are the number of chirps per frame, ADCs but with a lower perception accuracy (Table 1).
(receiver channels), and samples per chirp, respectively. To further reduce computation while maintaining
Higher Np, C, and sampling bandwidth (more S' per accuracy, we propose SSMRadNet, a novel radar processing
chirp) improve angular, velocity, and range resolutions, framework that models (synchronous) samples from
respectively, but also increase computational demand on all receivers (Np, antennas) as sequential tokens
perception algorithms. and processes using a multi-scale state-space model
Traditionally, radar perception models generate sparse (SSM)(Figure |). The SSM can capture long-duration
point clouds from a 3D Range-Azimuth-Doppler (RAD) dependencies, and its computation scales linearly with
tensor, which are computed by applying multi-stage FFTs sequence length, instead of quadratically, as in transformers
on ADC cubes. The point clouds are processed by [4, 6, 7, 10, 14]. Although, SSM _ shows. superior
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for end tasks performance than transformers on vision tasks[6, 7], SSM
(Figure 1,Table 1) [12, 16, 18, 20-22, 25, 25, 32]. for radar processing have not been demonstrated yet.
However, creation and processing of point clouds introduce SSMRadNet has one SSM (.e., states) to process ADC
